# Dimitriou_etal_2025
This file was generated by A. Dimitriou 23-06-2025

# General Information 

1. Project Title: "The effect of outdoor recreation on mammal habitat use and diversity in protected areas revealed by COVID-19 closures"

2. Author information: 
Corresponding Author
		Name: Alexandra Dimitriou
		Institution: Department of Forest Resources Management, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada

Coauthor 1 
Name: Dr. Sarah Benson-Amram
		Institution: Departments of Zoology & Forest and Conservation Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
		
Coauthor 2 
Name: Dr. Kaitlyn Gaynor
		Institution: Department of Zoology , University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
		
Coauthor 3
Name: Melanie Percy
		Institution: BC Parks, BC Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Strategy, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada
		
Coauthor 4 
Name: Dr. A. Cole Burton
		Institution: Department of Forest Resources Management, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
		
3. Dates of Data Collection August 2020-September 2022
- Joffre Lakes reopened to the public on June 21, 2021
- Garibaldi was open to the public for the entire study period

4. Geographic location of data collection: Joffre Lakes Provincial Park and Garibaldi Provincial Park, British Columbia, Canada

5. Funding sources that supported the collection of the data: British Columbia Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Strategy; Canada Research Chairs program; Natural Sciences and Engineering Council of Canada; University of British Columbia

6. Recommended citation for this dataset: Dimitriou et al. (2025). Data from: The effect of outdoor recreation on mammal habitat use and diversity in protected areas revealed by COVID-19 closures, Zenodo, Dataset

# Description


# Data files
- model_data.csv : monthly independent detections of species and predictor variables for the habitat use models
- GARI_30min_Independent_daily_observations.csv : daily independent detections of species by camera station in Garibaldi Provincial Park 
- JOFF_30min_Independent_daily_observations.csv : daily independent detections of species by camera station in Joffre Lakes Provincial Park
- GARI_IUCN.csv: These data represent terrestrial mammal species whose IUCN range polygons overlap with the boundaries of Garibaldi Provincial Park. Relevant fields were extracted from the IUCN Red List spatial data.
- JOFF_IUCN.csv: These data represent terrestrial mammal species whose IUCN range polygons overlap with the boundaries of Joffre Lakes Provincial Park. Relevant fields were extracted from the IUCN Red List spatial data.

## DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR: model_data.csv
Deployment.Location.ID: camera trap station ID. 
start_date: first day of the survey month. 
end_date: last day of the survey month. 
latitude: latitude of Deployment.Location.ID. 
longitude: longitude of Deployment.Location.ID. 
park: which park (Joffre Lakes of Garibaldi) the detection was in
year: year of the detection. 
effort: monthly effort at Deployment.Location.ID. 
log_effort: log transformed effort used as an effort offset term. 
trail: whether the camera trap was deployed on trail or off traildist_to_trail: distance in meters to the nearest hiking trail from the camera trap (on trail = 0). 
prox_to_trail_decay: decay transformed dist_to_trail (e^(-distance/500m)) (on trail = 1). Previously named dist_to_trail_decay.  
elevation: elevation in meters above sea level.
elevation scaled: elevation scaled by subtracting the mean and dividing by SD. 
mean_ndvi: Mean Normalized Difference in Vegetation Index per month at each CT site, measured in 16-day intervals (250-meter resolution). Mean is the average of each 16-day value which overlaps a minimum of 5 days with a given month.  
mean_ndvi_scaled: mean_ndvi scaled by subtracting the mean and dividing by SD. 
canopy_cover: Percentage of vegetation taller than 2m (100m radius around CT site).
canopy_cover_scaled: canopy_cover scaled by subtracting the mean and dividing by SD. 
recreation_park_month: total number of independent human detections in the entire park within a given survey month. 
rec_month_100: effort corrected recreation_park_month (recreation_park_month/ monthly effort x 100). 
rec_month_100_scaled: rec_month_100 scaled by subtracting the mean and dividing by SD. 
recreation_park_year: total number of independent human detections in the entire park within a given survey year (only months May through October included). 
rec_year_100: effort corrected recreation_park_year (recreation_park_year/yearly effort x 100). 
rec_year_100_scaled: rec_year_100 scaled by subtracting the mean and dividing by SD. 
recreation_site_month: total number of independent human detections at a given camera trap station within a given survey month. 
rec_site_100: effort corrected recreation_site_month (recreation_site_month/monthly effort x 100). 
rec_site_100_scaled: rec_site_100 scaled by subtracting the mean and dividing by SD. 
lepus_detections: number of independent detections of snowshoe hare (Lepus americanus) at a given camera trap station, in a given survey month. 
ursus_detections: number of independent detections of black bear (Ursus americanus) at a given camera trap station, in a given survey month. 
odocoileus_detections: number of independent detections of mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus) at a given camera trap station, in a given survey month. 
martes_detections: number of independent detections of American marten (Martes americana) at a given camera trap station, in a given survey month. 
canis_detections: number of independent detections of coyote (Canis latrans) at a given camera trap station, in a given survey month. 
lynx_detections: number of independent detections of bobcat (Lynx rufus) at a given camera trap station, in a given survey month. 
marmota_detections: number of independent detections of hoary marmot (Marmota caligata) at a given camera trap station, in a given survey month. 
rare_detections: combined number of independent detections of rare carnivores (Canada lynx, cougar, grey wolf, grizzly bear, wolverine) at a given camera trap station, in a given survey month. 

## DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR: GARI_30min_Independent_daily_observations.csv and JOFF_30min_Independent_daily_observations.csv
Date: calendar date in format YYYY-MM-DD
Deployment.Location.ID: camera trap station ID
Effort: daily effort (1 = camera active, 0 = camera not active)
Subsequent columns represent the number of independent detections of each species (detection threshold of 30 minutes) at a given station on a given day 

## DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR: GARI_IUCN.csv and JOFF_IUCN.csv
SCI_NUM: scientific name of species
COMPILER: organization or entity that compiled the record
YRCOMPILED: year of the record
CITATION: citation for the source of the IUCN spatial record
LEGEND: IUCN presence category for the species 
PROT_NAME: name of protected area intersecting IUCN polygon
PROT_DESG: Designation of protected area
